---
title: tarzan 
date: 2022-12-11 00:00:00 Z
permalink: "/blog/2022/12/tarzan/"
layout: post
published: true
---

I, the conscious part of myself, cannot make significant improvements in myself. But I, the unconscious part of myself, can.

That is the part of the self that is given free rein and full support in darkness. It swoops in like Tarzan to fix what's broken, clean out the trash, and pump us back up.

I have gone into darkness suicidally depressed and emerged 3 days later with no thoughts or feelings of death. I felt good, calm, and energized. I was clear and  purposeful. I got right back into the plot I had lost sometime before my retreat. The effect lasted months. 

That was just three days in an apartment, a minimal length and set of conditions. Longer retreats promise complete, permanent recovery from _everything_. This includes physical injury and illness, including aging, birth defects, amputation, and war trauma. In other words, the very worst wounds dealt us on Earth can heal. Their myriad disastrous effects can evaporate like they never happened.

This is the promise of hygienic darkroom retreating: an actual solution to our actual problem of suffering. I mean our persistent, inordinacan healte existential suffering. We call it the human condition. It is not. It is sickness. It is rooted in mass major trauma from an ancient cataclysm manifesting as the routine brutality of civilization. It can heal.

Some people can't seem to get it. They think I am talking about something other than solving our real problems. They don't think these things can be reversed. They think darkness is a cool and groovy thing to do. No, it is a life and death necessity. That's why  I sought it out and hammered it into a protocol everyone (with a home) can succeed at.

Give it a try. Let me know how it goes and what you need help with.
