---
title: "shelter and i"
date: 2023-01-14 09:00:01 Z
permalink: "/blog/2023/01/shelter-i/"
layout: post
published: false
---

There are three things going on for me with shelter.

1. Psychologically, I am homeless. I feel sick, weak, and helpless about it. 

    I almost never felt at home with my family. I think I felt welcome and that I was one of them. But I did not connect with them. They were emotionally unavailable. My ties to the people and house felt weak and tired.

    This manifested later in my actual homelessness. I could not keep a good situation. Either it was so good I couldn't allow myself to stay. Or it was good enough, and I found a way to ruin it and get ejected. Situations worked when I was in a detached building, I arranged my own food, and didn't see the owner more than once a week.
2. My elders taught me about design, economics, and politics. When I learned the Draconian terms on which such bad, overpriced shelter* as we have was offered, I rejected it. I began inventing ways live without it. 

    I have slept in hundreds of places. Only occasionally were they better than substandard. When I was young, it was a fun challenge. Now it just exhausts, degrades, and debilitates me.
3. When young, I saw virtually everyone go after money and property. The problem seemed handled. So I went for what was not being handled. We could join forces later.

    I found out how we can become fit to live, and to live together. I found secret, fruitful things to do about land and buildings themselves. 

    I will build something for myself. And show others how to build for health and freedom. I would like decent, safe shelter provided me to begin with. This is the trade I am offering to those with land.

&nbsp;

*Conventional shelter has:

- unnatural, ugly, square shapes
- stupid, inefficient, difficult designs and methods of construction
- inferior, clumsy, toxic materials and utilities

Then there are the 

- insane rules and controls that accompany it every step of the way, all in the name of safety, which is not achieved (mold, psychical incompatibility, homelessness itself)
- obscene prices, 100-1000x greater than necessary

It is a recipe for slavery. I would sooner die than go along with it, just as many are dying in the streets today. Those behind this model have blood on their hands. They must be dethroned. (I know how to do this, too.)
